## Chapter 10 - TRANSPORTATION RISK MANAGEMENT (Summary)


Chapter Objectives:

After reading this chapter, you should be able to do the following:
1.	Understand the nature of transportation risk and disruptions. 
2.	Explain the concept of risk management. 
3.	Identify the primary categories and types of transportation risk.
4.	Describe the general process for managing transportation risk.
5.	Understand the key factors in risk assessment. 
6.	Discuss the four techniques for managing transportation risks.
7.	Appreciate the challenge of balancing transportation security and global trade efficiency.

Chapter Overview

With supply chains spanning the globe, the risk of disruptions has never been greater. Whether the problem is as major as a terrorist threat or as minor as a weather delay, any type of problem can create a harmful ripple effect across the supply chain. Complex supply chain networks with multiple suppliers, manufacturers, distributors, and logistics service providers also create interdependencies and difficulties that can hide vulnerabilities and problems. Thus, transportation managers must not idly stand by and hope for the best when they move freight. They must actively work to limit exposure to legitimate hazards. 
 
Cyberattacks are just one type of threat that organizations face when moving goods around the globe. Major incidents—hurricanes, pandemics, labor unrest, and terrorism—create societal problems and significant business challenges. From a transportation standpoint, they are disruptive events that result in supply chain disorder and discontinuity. The outcomes can vary dramatically from minor inconveniences and delivery delays to tremendous problems that threaten a company’s image and financial outlook. 

RISK CONCEPTS 

Risk is an ever-present issue in transportation. When companies put freight in a container, railcar, or trailer and move it between distant origin and destination points, the freight can potentially be stolen, damaged, lost, or delayed while in motion or at rest in a port, trucking terminal, rail yard, or other intermediate facility. Transportation professionals (and students) must work to understand the nature of risk and be proactive in the prevention and management of risk. 

To facilitate a stronger understanding of transportation risk, a few key concepts are identified and defined:

Disruption—disturbance or problems that interrupt an event, activity, or process.

Transportation Disruption—any significant delay, interruption, or stoppage in the flow of trade caused by a natural disaster, heightened threat level, an act of terrorism, or any transportation security incident.

Risk—exposure to the chance of injury or loss.

Transportation Risk—a future freight movement event with a probability of occurrence and the potential for impacting supply chain performance.

Risk Management—the identification, analysis, assessment, control, and avoidance, minimization, or elimination of unacceptable risks.
 
Business Continuity Planning—task of identifying, developing, acquiring, documenting, and testing procedures and resources that will ensure continuity of a firm’s key operations in the event of an accident, disaster, emergency, and/or threat.

Why are these issues important? Simply stated, transportation and supply chain disruptions are common and costly. 

A Zurich Insurance Lt. study revealed that 74 percent of businesses around the world experience supply chain disruptions. Nearly 14 percent of the disruptions have a financial cost in excess of $1.1 million. 

TRANSPORTATION RISK MANAGEMENT PROCESS

Risk management and business continuity planning are not simple tasks. They demand significant time and expertise, involve financial investment, and require frequent revision. Hence, risk management activities must be driven by the top management of companies across a supply chain if transportation disruptions risks are to be minimized. They must view risk management as critical tool for protecting profitability and implement detailed, cyclical processes to control risk. A four-step risk management methodology is discussed in this section. 

The objectives of the risk management process include the following: 

•	Develop a common understanding of risk across multiple functions and business units to manage risk cost-effectively on an enterprise-wide basis.
•	Build and improve capabilities to respond effectively to low-probability, critical, catastrophic risks.
•	Achieve a better understanding of risk for competitive advantage.
•	Build safeguards against earnings-related surprises.
•	Achieve cost savings through better management of internal resources.
•	Allocate capital more efficiently.

Step 1 - Risk Identification 
Step 1 involves identification of the potential threats and disruptions to which the organization is susceptible. Structural and procedural changes may be required to execute the strategy. 

Accurate and detailed risk identification is vital for effective risk management. This involves a concerted effort to discover, define, describe, document, and communicate risks before they become problems and adversely affect freight flows. Techniques such as brainstorming, interviews, and historical information analysis can be used to highlight risks. 

This activity will likely produce a long list of transportation risks that must be managed. Students should become familiar with the primary categories of risk discussed in detail in this section:
•	Product loss
•	Product damage
•	Product contamination
•	Delivery delay
•	Supply chain interruption
•	Security breach 
 
This section discusses 18 specific risks within these categories but students must understand that the list is not comprehensive. The perils of transportation are many and varied. Hazardous materials dangers, the corrosive nature of saltwater, border crossing issues, military conflicts, and a host of other issues constantly threaten to disrupt transportation operations. Managers must remain vigilant to possible threats and constantly analyze transportation risk.

Step 2 - Risk Assessment

Step 2 focuses on evaluation and prioritization of the risks. The more vulnerable the organization’s transportation process is to a potential risk, the more attention it should receive.

The objective of risk assessment is to evaluate the risks identified during Step 1 in order to determine how serious each risk is to the organization. In making this determination, three parameters are typically evaluated:

•	Probability—the likelihood of the risk occurring 
•	Impact—the consequences if the risk does occur in terms of service time, cost, and/or quality
•	Proximity—the anticipated timing of the risk
Risk can be evaluated via qualitative or quantitative analysis. Each method can be time consuming but provide invaluable information regarding critical transportation challenges and primary disruption concerns. The effort also steers scarce resources toward the resolution of major issues. 

Step 3 - Risk Management Strategies

Step 3 requires the organization to develop proactive risk management and mitigation strategies.

Mitigation strategies identify specific efforts, actions, and procedural changes that must be taken by management to reduce high priority risks. The goal is to lower the probability of risk occurrence and/or minimize the negative impact if the risk occurs. A risk can never be totally eliminated, but its frequency and effect on the organization can be reduced if properly addressed.

An appropriate strategy seeks to address risk through one of four means: 

•	Risk avoidance - taking steps to eliminate or quell sources of disruptions
•	Risk reduction - developing practices to reduce the likelihood of a disruption and/or limit the severity of financial loss (e.g., buffering, postponement, and hedging).
•	Risk transfer - share responsibility for risk management with trading partner or reassign risk to third party such as an insurance company or 3PL firm. 
•	Risk retention - when risks have limited potential to negatively affect the supply chain, the organization may decide to “do nothing” and accept the consequences of occurrence.

Step 4 - Risk Review and Monitoring

Step 4 promotes continuity, vigilance, and process improvement. Ongoing testing of strategies, evaluation of their success, and scanning for new risks are needed to achieve maximum protection. 

The goal of the risk review stage is to establish a repeatable, measurable, verifiable validation process that can be run from time to time to continually verify the organization’s ability to manage risk. Risk management and mitigation plans should be updated as deemed necessary by the monitoring process. 

Study Questions

1.	Describe the concepts of disruptions and risks as they apply to transportation. Why are they important from financial and service standpoints?

Transportation Disruption—an unplanned or unanticipated event that interrupts the normal flow of goods and materials through the supply chain. These disruptions expose companies within the supply chain to operational and financial risks.

Transportation Risk—a future freight movement event with a probability of occurrence and the potential for impacting supply chain performance. 

Problems arise when the threat of transportation disruptions and hazards become reality and the supply chain is negatively affected. At minimum, disruptions are nuisances, creating extra work and delays. Recovery efforts hurt productivity, involve expensive expediting efforts, and require premium freight services. At worst, disruptions inflict long-term damage to a company’s image, profitability, and stock price. 

2.	Risk management consists of a series of steps that should be followed to reduce the consequences of disruptions. Briefly discuss these steps.

Risk Identification: Step 1 involves identification of the potential threats and disruptions to which the organization is susceptible. Structural and procedural changes may be required to execute the strategy. 

Risk Assessment - Step 2 focuses on evaluation and prioritization of the risks. The more vulnerable the organization’s transportation process is to a potential risk, the more attention it should receive. The objective of risk assessment is to evaluate the risks identified during Step 1 in order to determine how serious each risk is to the organization. 

Risk Management Strategy Creation - Step 3 requires the organization to develop proactive risk management and mitigation strategies. The goal is to lower the probability of risk occurrence and/or minimize the negative impact if the risk occurs. These risks can be addressed through one of four means: avoidance, reduction, transfer, or retention. 

Risk Review and Monitoring - Step 4 promotes continuity, vigilance, and process improvement. Ongoing testing of strategies, evaluation of their success, and scanning for new risks are needed to achieve maximum protection. 

3.	Six different categories of transportation risk were discussed in the chapter. Identify these categories, describe them, and give transportation examples for each risk categories. 

The primary categories of risk discussed in Chapter 10 include:

•	Product loss - any type of action or negligence that leads to product not reaching the intended buyer.
•	Product damage - a potential peril that arises every time a shipment is handled. Damaged product loses much, if not all, of its value.
•	Product contamination - any type of spoilage, tampering, or exposure problem that leads to corruption of the product and loss of value. 
•	Delivery delay - any type of failure to meet transit time and delivery deadline commitments constitute a delay. 
•	Supply chain interruption - a major problem that brings the transportation operation to a complete and prolonged stoppage. 
•	Security breach - a failure to properly protect in-transit freight from potential security problems that threaten citizens and nations. 

Transportation risk examples for each category are discussed throughout the chapter and are summarized in the following table.
 

4.	Risk analysis is a critical component of risk management. When conducting this activity, what are the two components of risk that must be analyzed? Why are they important? 

The objective of risk assessment is to evaluate the risks identified during Step 1 in order to determine how serious each risk is to the organization. In making this determination, two parameters are typically evaluated:

•	Probability—the likelihood of the risk occurring is important to know as it influence the chosen strategy or response to mitigate the risk.
•	Impact—the consequences if the risk does occur in terms of service time, cost, and/or quality problems

5.	What are the key outputs of a risk assessment process? What should be done with these outputs?

Risk assessment is an invaluable activity for identifying critical transportation challenges and primary disruption concerns. The process can include the following outputs:

•	Qualitative analysis provides a baseline evaluation of risks in a rapid and cost-effective manner. This approach classifies each risk in terms of low, medium, or high probability and impact. 
•	Quantitative analysis is warranted for those risks falling into the “Major” risk category. This analysis incorporates numerical estimates of frequency or probability and consequence. 
•	 Risk Assessment Report highlights risk management priorities and “red flag” issues. The output of the report provides:  
1.	Relative ranking or prioritization of risks 
2.	List of risks requiring immediate response 
3.	List of risks for additional analysis and response 
4.	Watch list of low priority risks 
5.	List of risks grouped by categories
6.	Risk trends 

The output from the Risk Assessment should be used to create a coherent strategy for managing and mitigating transportation risks in a cost effective manner.

6.	What does it mean when a company tries to mitigate their transportation risk? How can they accomplish this?

Mitigation is defined as the action of lessening in severity or intensity.

A mitigation strategy identifies specific efforts, actions, and procedural changes that must be taken by management to reduce high priority risks. The goal is to lower the probability of risk occurrence and/or minimize the negative impact if the risk occurs. A risk can never be totally eliminated, but its frequency and effect on the organization can be reduced if properly addressed.

Mitigation strategies must not be haphazardly applied to disruption risks. First, the strategies must be in sync with the overall supply chain strategy and corporate strategy. Second, mitigation strategies and actions must focus on high priority issues. Third, the mitigation action must be reasonable in terms of cost and time to implement versus the likelihood of success. Finally, a standardized process should be used to implement disruption mitigation actions. 

7.	What is the role of insurance in transportation risk management? 

If a transportation risk is determined to be too problematic to manage or mitigate on its own, the organization may seek outside assistance in controlling those risks. This risk transfer strategy provides a means to place liability on a third party should the risk occur. Of course, the third party doesn’t freely accept the risk. They are paid by the customer to assume or share the risk.

Insurance is a common method of risk transfer. Transportation companies and their customers can purchase insurance to outright transfer or limit their risks. For example, the financial risks stemming from commercial vehicle accidents and related lawsuits are very high. Rather than setting aside a large pool of money to self-insure against these possible problems, most transportation companies purchase coverage from insurance companies. They are using the strategy of risk transfer as a means to place financial liability on a third party (the insurance company) should the risk (a vehicle accident) occur. Insurance can also be purchased to protect against freight loss, damage, and delay. 

8.	Why is risk management considered to be a continuous loop process? 

Risk management planning is not a static, one-time process. Organizations cannot analyze risks, develop plans, and simply assume that the plans can be perfectly implemented as needed. Instead, a testing and review process must be instituted to ensure that existing risk mitigation efforts and disruption recovery processes work as intended. Thus, risk management requires ongoing effort by the organization.

9.	Describe the challenges that governments and organizations face when addressing transportation security risks.

The number, nature, and origin of threats are on the rise. As trade becomes more global, the challenge is to monitor and control flows from problematic areas. Some of the risks are purely physical in nature. Longer distances, greater product handling, multiple border crossings, and more intermediaries each make the supply chain more susceptible to loss, damage, and delay problems. Other challenges are man-made, motivated by political, ideological, or criminal intent.

A delicate balance must be struck between security and the efficient flow of global commerce. If security is too tight it could impede the flow of goods, causing delays and decreased efficiency. If trade efficiency is over-emphasized, security can be compromised.

10. What are the key challenges of developing secure supply chains for global trade?

Given the importance of global trade to the U.S. economy, a delicate balance must be struck between security and the efficient flow of global commerce. If security is too tight it can impede the flow of goods, causing delays and decreased efficiency. If trade efficiency is overemphasized, security can be compromised.

Compounding the challenge of this dangerous environment is the variety of risks inherent in global trade. Some of the risks are purely physical in nature. Longer distances, greater product handling, multiple border crossings, and more intermediaries each make the supply chain more susceptible to loss, damage, and delay problems.
Other global trade challenges are man-made, motivated by political, ideological, or criminal intent. These issues create an urgent public safety dimension to transportation risk. 

Case Questions

CASE 10-1 Young Again Pharmaceuticals 

1.	Assess the transportation risks identified in the brainstorming session. Create and populate a table similar to the one found in Figure 9-2. 

This assessment requires some judgment by the students, so there is no single correct answer. However, they should develop a matrix that looks something like this:
 

2.	Based on your answer to Q1, what are the three primary risks that the company must address? Why?

Again, there is no single correct answer, but students should focus on the risks that are categorized in the black boxes. Each of these represents a problematic combination of probability of occurrence and negative impact on the organization. Combining the company’s stated concern about the value, fragility, and theft potential of the goods with the need for intermodal transport yields the major risks of product damage, pilferage, and diversion of goods to unauthorized channels. 

3.	What do you recommend that YAP do to mitigate each of the three risks identified in Q2?

Student responses should be logical, cost efficient, and effective in terms of addressing their perceived major risks. For example:

Potential damage due to wet packaging or excessive movement – The appropriate solution may be to use an integrated air cargo company to move the goods from Puerto Rico to major U.S. and Canadian distribution points. This would eliminate the major risks of ocean transport as well as the problems of working with different carriers for the international and domestic moves (i.e., product sitting idle and visibility being limited during transfer from one carrier to another). 

Similar responses should be developed for each of the other key risks.

4.	What should YAP focus on after attempting to mitigate these transportation risks?

YAP should participate in Step 4 of the risk management process. They must understand that their risk management and mitigation plans will not be perfect. Testing, experience, and actual disruptions will necessitate action plan changes and improvements to better deal with the risks being faced. The goal of the risk review stage is to establish a repeatable, measurable, verifiable validation process that can be run from time to time to continually verify the organization’s ability to manage risk. 


CASE 10-2 Techno-Shades
 
1.	What issues should Butler evaluate in his assessment of transportation risks? 

Given the locations of the suppliers and their stated transportation issues, one must consider the potential for compliance issues and delivery delays that Himmer identified. Additional risk concerns would revolve around product damage during transit, theft of intellectual property rights, and product loss given the high value of the goods and ease of theft. 

2.	Analyze each supplier option that Butler is considering. What specific risks does each supplier option present?

In evaluating each supplier, it is important to evaluate the risks related to product quality, cost, capacity to meet production requirements, intellectual property rights protection, and delivery.

Supplier 1 
Product quality - risk is low, given their technology product experience.
Cost – 1,700 ILS converts to $450 USD as of June, 2015. There is moderate risk due to relative currency exchange changes and inflation. 
Capacity - risk is low because they currently have excess capacity.
IP Rights - risk is moderate to low. 
Delivery - risk is high as Techno-Shades has responsibility to get the product from Tel Aviv to the United States. They must deal with choosing a carrier, insuring the goods, and compliance with transportation regulations to ensure that product is not delayed at the U.S. border. 

Supplier 2 
Product quality - risk is high because the supplier has limited experience with wearable devices and is a former state-owned industry.
Cost - risk is low due to the price being quoted in USD. The $459 price is good but must be weighed against quality and delivery risks.
Capacity - risk is unknown because there is no mention of capacity.
IP Rights - risk is potentially high as Chinese enforcement of IP regulations tends to be lax.
Delivery - risk is very high as Techno-Shades has full responsibility for moving goods from the far inland factory to the United States. They must deal with moving the goods from a remote location across a long and unknown transportation system, choosing a carrier, insuring the goods, and complying with transportation regulations to ensure that product is not delayed at the U.S. border. The potential for significant delays is very high.

Supplier 3 
Product quality - risk is very low as the supplier has vast experience with technology products.
Cost – 385 Euros converts to $385 USD as of June 2015. That is an excellent price but risks exist due to possible exchange rate fluctuation. With the cost including delivery to the United States, the overall cost is significantly lower than the other options.
Capacity - risk is high as the company is already stretching their capacity.
IP Rights - risk is fairly low. The other major manufacturers’ use of this supplier indicates a solid level of trust and a reputation for protecting IP rights. 
Delivery - risk is lowest among the three suppliers. Techno-Shades will only need to deal with delivery from Newark to U.S. customers. They still need to consider potential problems and delays but the supplier is clearly experienced in global logistics. 

3.	Which supplier would you recommend that Butler choose to best balance company goals with supply chain risk?

This assessment requires some judgment by the students, so there is no single correct answer. It is possible to use a ranking system for the risk factors identified in Q2 to determine which supplier is the best option for Techno-Shades. The key here is to consider all factors in light of the company’s need for a highly successful product. Given the experience questions surrounding Supplier 2 and the high delivery risks, the discussion should revolve around the merits of Supplier 1 vs. Supplier 3, with the latter getting the nod based on a combination of low price (as of June 2015) and reasonable risk. 

4.	What types of security issues and requirements will confront Techno-Shades if they off-shore manufacturing?

Techno-Shades will be the importer of record and needs to comply with all security related regulations of the U.S. government. They must work with their suppliers, carriers, and third party logistics service providers to understand and abide by the regulations to avoid the risk of delay and fines, as well as protect their products against security breaches. These key regulations include the Container Security Initiative and the Advanced Manifest Rules.

Techno-Shades could also take a proactive approach to security risk mitigation by working with known suppliers, using reputable ports and carriers, and maintaining shipment visibility throughout the supply chain. They can also participate in government programs that promote safe trading practices such as the Customs-Trade Partnership Against Terrorism and the Free and Secure Trade Program.


SUGGESTED INTERNET PROJECT

Develop a list of product/country of origin pairs and assign each one to a different student. Ask the student to identify potential risks and threats related to moving the product to North American destinations. Each student should be required to create a table similar to Table 9-1 that is specific to the assigned product/country of origin pair. Students should address current events, emerging issue, and ongoing considerations (e.g., geographic factors, political relationships).

Some helpful websites include: 

American Shipper		www.americanshipper.com 

CIA World Fact Book	www.cia.gov/library/publications/resources/the-world-factbook/index.html 

Logistics Management	http://www.logisticsmgmt.com/

The Economist		www.economist.com 

Transport Topics 		www.ttnews.com 

U.S. Customs and 
Border Protection		www.cbp.gov 

U.S. Department of
Transportation		www.dot.gov

Wall Street Journal	https://www.wsj.com/


